Good morning everyone. I'm Dr. Bag. I'm course director medical biochemistry. Today we will be learning overview of metabolic pathways. Metabolic pathways are coming up big time in your course. So let's introduce metabolic pathways, its key components to know metabolic pathways when they come in your course later. So I will be covering this lecture under the following objective. Uh metabolism consists of catabolism and anabolism. We will enumerate the differences between the two. Then in objective two, we'll try to identify the key comp components required for metabolism along with the activated carriers that are essential for metabolism. We will also talk about in objective number three the multi-step enzyme catalyze pathway which is usually a metabolic pathway and what are the rate limiting steps, the committed steps and what are the differences between the two. And lastly in objective number four because it's a multi-step enzyme catalyze pathway mainly the metabolic pathways are multi step enzyme catalyze pathway. We will also talk about regulation of different steps. So let's do the first learning objective. Please know that you have been provided a metabolic map which is interconnected with various metabolism of lipid, carbohydrate, protein and other macronutrients. So to start with I would like to first give you an overview of what I'm teaching today. That's how I think the we have to introduce the lecture. Let's see what we are going to talk about the lecture first. So you know metabolism has catabolism as well as anabolism. Please realize that first you have your macronutrients your diet. Your diet consists of your macronutrients your carbohydrate, lipid and protein. Carbs preferred fuel lipid concentrated fuel proteins mainly for building blocks but also used for energy. But along with these macronutrients carbohydrate lipid protein you also require micronutrients vitamin and mineral that help or enhance the activity of the enzyme that metabolize these macronutrients. So we talk about them together. You should understand that when you consume your macronutrients and micronutrients help in metabolism. The first step is catabolism. Catabolism mainly involve oxidation. As you know oxidation means gain of oxygen or loss of hydrogen. In our body oxidation is mainly by loss of hydrogen. And who are the acptors of of the reducing equivalents at the end of oxidation your NAD your NADP the FAD which will be dealt later in this lecture which are vitamins used as co-enzyme so yes the major part of your catabolism is oxidation which you do while losing hydrogen and finally once you lose hydrogen from oxidizing these macronutrients what you get is the NADH FADH2 which are or NADPH which are are the acptors of these reducing equivalents or hydrogen. The major pathway for oxidation are glycolysis, TCA and HMP shunt. Glycolysis is mainly for carbs. TCA is well you will learn triricaroxilic acid cycle or citric citric acid cycle which will come up later in metabolism is a common pathway for carbohydrate, lipid and protein. HMP which is hexos mono phosphate pathway is an alternate pathway for oxidation. Those glycolysis and TCA are for energy or ATP. HMPP shunt is a bit different. It is not for ATP giving you ATP in the body. It actually gives you NADPH and pentosis. NADPH as I just told you because of oxidation in our body by these metabolic pathway is by loss of hydrogen rather than gain of oxygen. So there is something that is accepting these reducing equivalents when they are lost when you oxidize that macronutri nutrients and the acptors of reducing equalence. One of them is NADP which is converted into NADPH at the end of oxidation. NAD is converted into NADH plus H+ and FAD is converted into FADH2. So at the end of the oxidation if you have a lot of NADH what will you have? A lot of NADH FADH2 or NADPH which we'll learn later. So can you burn carb and fat and get energy? Why not? Not when you burn carb and fat you get lot of acoa in turn which gives you ATP lot of a COA which in turn gives you ATP but the difference is you burn carb in a well-fed state which is a high insulin state whereas you burn fat in a low insulin state also please remember as I told you your catabolism involves mainly oxidation and oxidation in your body is not by gain of oxygen mainly it is by loss of hydrogen and once Oxidation is complete. Who are the acptors of those hydrogen? I told you NAD, FAD and NADP. Once the oxidation is complete, what do you get in the end? A lot of NADH plus H+ FADH2 and NADPH. NADH is the uh indirect reflection or source of ATP. Please know that NADPH is never a source of ATP. Kindly remember that very important fact. So yes once you do catabolism and you get these acptors of reducing equivalence which is NADH FADH2 NADPH now body switches to anabolism. Why? What is anabolism? Look at this structure which is a structure of a fatty acid general structure of fatty acids and this fatty acids for synthesis of this fatty acid you need a source of carbon and a source of hydrogen but first of all the universal requirement of anabolism which you get from catabolism and don't forget it's not the NADPH but it's the NADH which is the source of ATP it could be FADH2 you will learn later which is a source of ATP but since NADH is a greater quantity of source of ATP that's why I have enumerated NADH but NADH is a source of ATP NADPH is never a source of ATP. So yes, you burn your macronutrients by loss of hydrogen. You get a lot of NADPH. NADH FADH2 which is not mentioned here but will be coming in the subsequent slides. NADH is a reflection of ATP. NADPH is never a reflection of or source of ATP. So once you have NADPH and ATP now you the body switches to anabolism catabolism. M slows down. What is anabolism? Anabolism means synthesizing products in your body. Remember synthesizing compound the first universal requirement is ATP. And where are you getting this ATP from? Catabolism of macronutrients. And who gives you ATP? As I just told you NADH, not NADPH. So yes, this is the universal requirement. So please and please never pick low energy state as active for anabolism and abolism you need a high energy status in the body or you need high ATP to turn on anabolism. Now since you have energy to synthesize uh the compounds now you need a source of carbon and hydrogen. Who's the source of carbon? Acetile go. It's a twocarbon compound. You will learn them later in metabolism. What is the source of hydrogen? NADPH. So NADPH is a source of hydrogen for reductive synthesis in your body. You must be familiar with the word reductive synthesis. Reductive synthesis means any synthesis that require hydrogen. And who brings in the hydrogen? For example, this is also an example of reductive synthesis. Synthesis of fatty acids. And who brings in the hydrogen here? NADPH. And also insulin is a major anabolic hormone. But there are two genesis insulin does not support. You should know that. One is gluconneioenesis which is synthesizing glucose from non-carbohydrate source and one the other is ketogenesis that means synthesis of ketone bodies these two genesis are not activated or supported by insulin but insulin otherwise is an anabolic hormone for any genesis in your body so I have enumerated what is catabolism anabolism which are two aspects of metabolism so let's do now objective one and clearly compare and contrast catab abolic and anabolic pathways though I have given you an overview of catabolism versus anabolism but let's look that look at them in the slide as I told you first you catabolize your macronutrients what are your macronutrients carbohydrate fats and protein carbohydrate preferred fuel fat concentrated fuel protein the building block but is also used for energy once you catabolize these macronutrients don't forget which is coming up later and as I've explained in my overview. These macronutrients also require micronutrients which is vitamins and minerals that enhance the activity of the enzyme that catabolize these macronutrients. So both are required. But once you catabolize the macronutrients and micronutrients help in it you know catabolism in your body which is mainly oxidation is in the form of loss of hydrogen rather than gain of oxygen. And once catabolism is complete the hydrogen are lost. and accepted by the acptors of reducing equivalents which are the hydrogen which examples are NAD, FAD, NADP. So at the end of catabolism yes you will have a lot of NADH, FADH2 and NADPH. How will this help? Since with catabolism you have lot of uh ATP and also the carrier of reducing equivalent NADPH. Now the body switches to Anabolism. Anabolism means genesis, synthesis of compound. And for synthesis, I told you first universal requirement is ATP. What is NADH? NADH is indirect reflection of ATP which is required for anabolism. NADPH is a source of hydrogen. As I told you, FADH2 is also a source of ATP just like NADH, but it's less produced. NADH is a common or NAD is a common acceptor of reducing equivalents as compared to FAD. But both NADH and FADH2 are reflection of an indirect source of ATP. Whereas NADPH which you also get from catabolism is not a source of ATP. It's the source of uh hydrogen and reductive synthesis. You know what is reductive synthesis? Reductive synthesis is any synthesis that require hydrogen. So yes, catabolism you have oxidation. What are the what is oxidation here? Not with mainly with gain of oxygen but loss of hydrogen. Who accepts these reducing equivalents? NAD, NADP and FAD. So at the end of catabolism you have a lot of ATP which is indirectly what is the source of it? NADH and FADH2. Both NADH and FADH2 are the source of ATP at the end of catabolism. So at the end of catabolism what will you see? As I told you earlier a lot of NADH NADPH and FADH2. NADH and FADH2 are the source of ATP but NADPH is not a source of ATP. What does NADPH give you? Reducing equivalence or hydrogen for which is also required for synthesis. Yes. What's the new universal requirement of anabolism? Anabolism cannot happen without ATP. But since anabolism I gave you an example of fatty acid, it also has carbon and hydrogen. So you need a source of carbon which which is estile COA which also you get from catabolism which is not enumerated here. You get estile COA you get NADH you get NADPH you get FADH2. So yes a COA is a source of carbon for anabolism and what is the source of hydrogen for anabolism? NADPH and you complete anabolism by synthesizing new compounds. So let's see what is catabolism versus anabolism. So yes you oxidize food stuff and break down but oxidation is here not by gain of oxygen inside our body but loss of hydrogen and naturally it's an exagonic process accompanied by release of energy which is which is stored first of all released in a step-wise manner and stored in the form of ATP since oxidation is not by gain of oxygen but loss of hydrogen who are the acceptor of reducing equivalents or hydrogen NAD NADP as I mentioned earlier FAD is also a acceptor of reducing equivalents at the end of of catabolism reducing equivalents are known as hydrogen 2 H+ and two electron. So yes NAD at the end of catabolism you will see a lot of NADH NADPH as well as FADH2. So is NADH FADH2 source of energy? Yes. Is NADPH a source of energy or ATP? No. NADPH is a source of hydrogen. But is it required for anabolism? Yes. So those I enumerated the different pathway for catabolism which is glycolysis, TCA cycle, HMP shunt. Glycolysis is mainly for carbs, carbohydrates. But triricaroxilic acid cycle or citric acid cycle is a common pathway for both all of the macronutrients fat, carb and protein. And remember I told you that first they form acetyl coa and then NADH, FAD H2 is produced. I also enumerated. So yes, this is a citric acid cycle whose starting molecule is estile COA citric acid cycle also known as triricaroxilic acid cycle TCA cycle which is the same citric acid cycle and tririccaroxilic acid cycle TCA cycle citric acid cycle is the same and the beauty about this cycle is all the macronutrients that is fat, carbohydrate, protein they converge into this cycle. Starting molecule is acetyl COA and it's oxidized as you know oxidation in our body is by loss of hydrogen who is acceptor of the reducing equivalence NAD FAD so at the end of the TCA cycle which is known as triricaroxilic acid cycle or citric acid cycle you get NADH and FADH2 NADH is al actually NADH plus H+ and FADH2 they both are the indirect source of ATP in your body which will be subsequently used for anabolism as glycolysis and TCA though glycolysis is mainly for carb triricaroxilic acid cycle or citric acid cycle is a common pathway oxidation pathway for carb lipid and protein please note there's also an alternate pathway of oxidation which is hexos monofphosphate shunt pentos phosphate pathway known as HMP shunt which is not for ATP but it also provides NADPH and pentosis. NADPH particularly here is used as a source of hydrogen for anabolism. Anabolism means source of hydrogen where for anabolic which anabolic reactions any genesis or anabolism that requires hydrogen. That is why NADPH is very essential for reductive synthesis in your body. Also please understand that yes you consume your diet in the form of fat, carb and protein. Don't forget that first to digest and absorb them which will be subsequently taught to you. Then they are picked up by the cells and then starts oxidation. The simplest absorbable forms are picked up by the cells and then starts oxidation. This slide is explaining you the citric acid cycle whose starting molecules is acetile COA and all fat protein fat carbs and protein converge to form acetile COA and this enters the TCA cycle to give you to NADH and FADH2 which is an indirect source of ATP. Alcohol is also it's not empty calories. It does gives you calories in your body. So what is anabolism? Once catabolism is complete what takes over in your body? Anabolism. Anabolism is synthesis of any compound. It's an androgonic reaction and requires ATP. Please know ATP and GTP are both energy required. for anabolism. Some synthesis reactions use ATP, some use GTP. But remember, it's a universal requirement for anabolism. Please do not pick uh anabolism being active in a low energy status. Only high ATP in the cells can turn on anabolism. But as I told you initially, I gave you an example of fatty acid. This is an example of cholesterol synthesis. Cholesterol synthesis first universal requirement of uh any synthesis is at P. So this is the equation which is showing you cholesterol synthesis. First universal requirement is ATP. Please don't memorize this reaction. This is just giving you example of just as I gave you an example of fatty acid synthesis in the beginning. Now I'm giving you an example of cholesterol synthesis here. So cholesterol synthesis since it's anabolism first of all the universal requirement is ATP. Do not forget that. But cholesterol also has carbon and hydrogen. Who is the source of carbon? Aile COA. And who is the source of hydrogen? NADPH. NADPH mainly is the source of hydrogen for any reductive synthesis in your body. And anabolism is complete. To summarize catabolism and anabolism, you must understand that catabolism is oxidation of your macronutrients, carbohydrate, lipid, protein. There are catabolism mainly involves oxidation. Oxidation in our body is not by gain of oxygen but loss of hydrogen. Also note that the pathway to catabolize or for oxidation are glycolysis, TCA and HMP shunt. Glycolysis is mainly for uh carbohydrates. Triricaroxic acid cycle, citric acid cycle they are a common pathway for oxidation of carbohydrate, lipid and protein. HMPP shunt is an alternate pathway for oxidation which is not a source of ATP but a very significant pathway in your body to give you NADPH and pentosis. Also please Please understand that in diet when you consume your macronutrients carbohydrate, lipid and protein first they are digested and absorbed as simple molecules picked up by the cells and then starts the process of catabolism. So for catabolism no you not only require macronutrients as I always uh I introduced in my overview you also require micronutrients vitamins like vitamins and mineral that enhance the activity of the enzyme that uh catabolize these macro Micronutrients. Once catabolism is complete, the hydrogen is lost from these macronutrients who are the acceptor of these hydrogen or reducing equivalents. They are also known as reducing equivalents. Your NAD, your NADP and FAD. So at the end of catabolism in the cells, you will find a lot of NADH also known as NADH plus H+ lot of FADH2 and NADPH. NADH and FADH2 are the source of ATP indirectly they are source of ATP which is required further for anabolism. NADPH is not the source of ATP but it's the source of reducing equivalence or hydrogen for reductive synthesis in your body. So if I want to enumerate what all you require for anabolism can you take a minute and enumerate what are the essential requirements for anabolism. For anabolism you require ATP. It's the universal requirement you need source of carbon aile COA you need source of hydrogen NADPH insulin is the major anabolic hormone except insulin does not support only two genesis in your body gluconneioenesis that is forming glucose from non-carbohydrate source and ketogenesis that is forming ketone bodies so yes since ATP is the major requirement or universal requirement for anabolism you should know what is ATP ATP structure is given here and you see these signs. These are the signs that enumerate their high energy phosphate bonds. So yes ATP is a high energy compound. What are high energy compound compounds that liberate energy or uh equivalent to ATP or higher. You will learn more high energy compound subsequently but this is the most common high energy compound in your body used in various reactions and especially genesis. How is ATP produced? By catabolism of macronutrients. So yes, it has two high energy phosphates and is a very commonly used energy source for any genesis or reaction in the body. So yes, as we have enumerated earlier, what is the difference between catabolism and anabolism? Catabolisms are definitely the ATP generating pathways and anabolism utilize the ATP generated by catabolic pathways. That is why please it's very important for you to understand that catabolisms provides you the energy in the form of NADH and FADH2 which is used for anabolism. Please know that anabolism which is ATP utilizing pathway cannot be turned on in a low energy status in your body. You need high ATP inside the cells to turn on anabolism. Anabolism is ATP utilizing pathway. So you know the differences between catabolism and anabolism. And as you see here, your macronutrients are consumed. Your macronutrients could be carbohydrate, lipid, protein. They are digested and absorbed in simple absorbable formed picked up by the cells and catabolism starts. Although I enumerated catabolic pathways as glycolysis, TCA and HMP shunt they are oxidative pathway. But here what is shown is uh triricaroxilic acid cycle citric acid cycle which is a common pathway for carbohydrate lipid protein. It starting molecule is esta once catabolism is complete you get a lot of NADH FADH2 which are indirectly the source of ATP from oxidation pathway glycolysis as well as TCA cycle as I enumerated earlier your HMP shunt hexos mono phosphate shunt or pentos phosphate pathway gives you an EDPH So yes, catabolism is converging. What is it getting the body ready for? Which diverging an pathway? Anabolism is anabolism is the body ready for anabolism. Why not? Because by oxidation pathway here it's only shown the citric acid cycle or the TCA cycle which is a cyclic oxidation pathway. You have lot of NADH, FADH2. So ATP is available for genesis and you have NADPH also which is a source of hydrogen acetal coa can be used as a source of carbon. So yes, you are ready now. Your body is ready now after the converging catabolic pathway into to get ready for these diverging diverging anabolic pathway or synthesis in your body. So you should know this these this difference too between the converging catabolism and the diverging anabolic pathways. So let's see what's the difference between catabolism and anabolism. Let's summarize. I have given you overview. I have explained you with the slides. But yes, you know the convergent catabolic pathways that do what? That provide the essential requirements for anabolism. What are the what is the converging catabolic pathway giving you? Lot of ATP in the form of NADH and FADH2. Uh lot of hydrogen in the form of uh source of hydrogen in the form of NADPH and also acetile COA as a source of carbon. Body is ready for anabolism. Please know that catabolism yes you consume your macronutrients like your carb, lipid and protein. You digest and absorb them as simple absorbable molecules. But catabolism is breaking down these complex molecule by oxidation into simpler molecules. Whereas anabolism means synthesis of complex molecule. And that is why I told you in the beginning the universal requirement for any genesis especially for the genesis of such a comp complex compound first you need what what is the universal requirement for anabolism yes it is ATP because you have to synthesize such a complex compound you cannot do without energy please know that it's the high ATP status inside your cell that turns on anabolic pathway or anabolism of these complex molecule and also realize that those high energy compounds or high energy ATP are given by catabolism of macron nutrients. Yes, it's an exogonic process that releases energy which is released and stored as ATP and anabolism uh anabolism uses that ATP for synthesis of complex compound. Catabolism is breaking down complex molecule in simple forms whereas anabolism is building the complex molecule for needs in the cells. Always and always remember catabolism gives you ATP that turns on anabolism. So anabolism cannot happen in a low energy status. You need a high energy charge, lot of ATP which are reflected by NADH and FADH2 to turn on anabolism. So let's see what anabolism and catabolism is by looking at this questions. So now you know what is anabolism versus catabolism. So can you pick up what are the major differences and how would you define cat metabolism here naturally catabolism is exagonic accompanied by release accompanied by first of all uh oxidation of your macronutrients carbohydrate lipid and protein and release of energy which is stored as ATP so yes they are exagonic whereas anabolism are yes they are enderonic so since you know the difference between catabolism and anabolism let's come to our objective Ive two and identify what are the key components of metabolism and what is the role of the activated carriers very important for you please understand as I told you the whole process in the beginning it just doesn't start with catabolism right inside the cells first you consume in diet your macronutrients carbohydrate lipid protein you also consume your micronutrients vitamins and minerals macronutrients are digested and absorbed into simple absorb able form picked up by cells for oxidation or utilization to release energy. Micronutrients play an important role in and by because they are used by the enzyme and they enhance the activity of the enzyme. Which micronutrients I will be talking more in concern with metabolism vitamins and minerals. So yes, this is what we learned with the nutrient and metabolic pathway. First your requirement is your dietary components what you consume in diet. Major your diet comp dietary components. Your macronutrients are carb, lipid and protein. As I told you, they are digested and absorbed into simple absorbable forms and then they are picked up by the cell for oxidations. Once the catabolism starts inside the cell, then you get energy in the form of NADH, FADH2. NADPH is also produced as a result of oxidation. But as I enumerated earlier, N NADPH is not a source of ATP. NADPH is a source of reducing equivalence which is also essential for metab for anabolism. NADPH is essential for anabolism. So yes, first of all your requirement when you come to key components of metabolic pathway are your macro macronutrients, carbohydrate, fat, proteins. They are absorbed, digested and absorbed as simple absorbable form. They are picked up by cell for catabolism or oxidation but don't Don't forget that you have your water soluble vitamin, your fat soluble vitamins, your minerals. So your vitamins and minerals that are used up by enzyme, they enhance the activity of the enzyme. So they can efficiently utilize these macronutrients. So yes, what are the major component right now which is on this slide which are key component for metabolism? Your macronutrients, carbohydrate, fat, protein and your vitamins and mineral which are your micronutrients. I will give you examples when I talk about enzyme. How vitamins and mineral are so key for metabolic pathway to enhance these metabolic pathway for efficient utilization of carbohydrate, lipid and protein and their oxidation. But please know most of the metabolic pathway you will see as a multi-step enzyme catalyze pathway. So yes, you need your macronutrients. For example, the macronutrients which is digested and absorbed here is carb. It is digested and absorbed as glucose. You will learn later how these macronutrients are absorbed. Carbohydrates are absorbed as glucose. Uh fat is absorbed as fatty acid and proteins are absorbed as amino acid. We will also learn other absorbable form of each but the major absorbable form for these for carbohydrates the monossaccharide glucose for fats fatty acid and for protein amino acids. Once they are digested and absorbed they are picked up by the cell and this is an example of metabolic pathway known as glycolysis. I enumerated earlier that the the three oxidative pathway or catabolic pathway which is glycolysis mainly for carb and you can see glucose here h which is the starting molecule or glucose 6 phosphate is the starting molecule of this pathway. We also talked about TCA cycle citric acid cycle which is common pathway for carbohydrate oxidation common oxidation pathway for carbohydrate lipid protein. Yes, I'm not going to talk about hexos monofphosphate shunt, pentos phosphate pathway known as HMP shunt uh which is a source of any DPH and pentosis in your body. But yes, these are the three oxidative pathway which you will learn later in your subsequent lectures. So yes you for this catabolism of these macronutrients you need enzymes. Enzymes are largely protein in nature which convert substrate into product per unit time. So as you were talking about the key components of metabolism, yes, one of them is macronutrients which are your carbohydrate, lipid, protein you consume in your diet. What you also consume from your diet is micronutrients, your vitamin and minerals. And once the catabolism or oxidation starts, what you need is the enzymes which metab which catalyze different chemical reaction in your body. They may catabolize oxidation reduction reaction where oxidation reduction is happening simultaneously in your body. They can liate compound using ATP. They can isomerize compound, convert one isomer into the other. They may be involved in transfer of group. They may be involved in breaking down compound using water or they may be involved in addition or removal of functional groups. So yes, enzymes are also essential component of metabolism and they catalyze various type of reaction in your body which will be reintroduced when we talk about metabolism and also with enzymes. enzyme class as I already told you that not only macronutrient which is carbohydrate, lipid, protein but also micronutrients are essential for metabolism. Which micronutrients are introduced? Vitamins and minerals. First of all, let's look at this high energy compound which is so important for anabolism. Most common high energy compound used for anabolism. Then I talked about some micronutrients in the form of vitamins and mineral which are used in anabolism. Please see this is an example of vitamins. All the vitamins and their active form and I as I told you earlier vitamins are used as co-enzyme in the reactions or in metabolic pathways. So you must know each vitamin and its co-enzyme form. For example, nascin has NAD and ADP. Riboflavin has FAD. Riboflavin also has FMN. Pentthenic acid is also known as B5 sources co-enzyme A in your body. Lipoic acid is a source of lipoate in your body. Thymine vitamin B1 is thymine pyroof phosphate. Biotin is used as such and folate active form is tetrahydroofolate. So all these vitamins are very essential source of co-enzymes. We have learned for example these co-enzyme NAD, NADP, FAD which are acceptor of reducing equivalent NADH, FADH2 after accepting reducing equivalence are a great source of ATP and NADPH once formed is not a source of ATP but was a source of reducing equivalent for anabolism. Apart from that there are also uh micronutrients or activated carriers which is the last few examples. For example, tetrahydropholate is a carrier of one carbon group. Big time we learn about tetrahydropholate which comes from folium green leafy vegetable source vitamin folate. SAM which is known as acetasile methionine. I tell My students always that Sam is not your next door neighbor. Sam is a active carrier of methyl group and you will learn them in various reaction. UDP as UDP glucose carrier of glucose is used for glycogen synthesis. Citadine diphosphate is also a carrier of uh phosphhatidate and you have other nucleioide triphosphates which you will also learn subsequently in these reaction. So actually this is a very important slide for you to understand that it's not just the macro nutrients, carbohydrate, lipid and protein. There are micronutrients, there are vitamins, minerals, activated carriers that are also very essential for the metabolic pathway inside your body. So yes, we need nutrients. First of all, you cannot have catabolism without nutrients, carbohydrate, lipid, protein. Nutrients need not only macro but micronutrients, which is vitamins and minerals. They are they enter the metabolic pathways, they are catabolized. You know catabolic pathways are converging which give you essential components that then enter anabolism which are diverging. So yes, you need to know that these key reactions not only require enzymes, they also require vitamins, minerals, activated carriers to complete the metabolic pathway and efficiently utilize carbohydrate, lipid and protein. Let's come to the objective uh three where I will be talking about these multi-step enzyme catalyze pathway and some of them are irreversible. Some step of this multi-step and enzyme catalyze pathway are irreversible. Let's see the difference between rate limiting step and committed step. Please know that you will be seeing these metabolic pathway in the form of multi-step enzyme catalyze pathway. Each step is catalyzed by the enzyme as you can see here. Some steps are irreversible and some steps are reversible. Irreversible steps are usually uh the highly regulated steps. Irreversible steps can be rate limiting or committed. We will see the difference between rate limiting and committed steps. Please also know that other steps may be regulated. That's why we will also see the mechanism of regulation of these steps. As I told you that the irreversible step is mainly rate limiting and committed step and for example the enzyme that catalyzes the rate limiting step is known as the rate limiting enzyme. So yes we will know enumerate these multi-step pathways subsequently in our lect. lectures. But as I told you, yes, the irreversible steps usually are the bottleneck of the pathway. So why are these steps highly regulated? Because they are bottleneck of the pathways. The irreversible step once you block this pathway, the whole pathway will be slowed down. Is it essential for your body? Yes. I will just give you an example of two pathways. Fatty acid synthesis, fatty acid oxidation. So do you want these two cycle to two pathways to occur simultaneously in your body. No, otherwise this purpose will become futile. You don't want fatty acid synthesis versus fatty acid oxidation to happen at the same time. So when fatty acid synthesis is active, fatty o acid oxidation has to slow down. When fatty acid oxidation is active, fatty acid synthesis has to slow down. So there works these irreversible steps which are rate limiting or committed. Uh subsequently we know we will know the difference or we will enumerate the difference. between rate limiting and committed step. But the mechanism of regulation is very important because once you block this pathway, the whole pathway is slowed down. So we will also learn the mechanism of regulation of these steps which is long-term and short-term regulation. Long-term regulation usually uh modifies the alters the enzyme quantity whereas whereas short-term regulation modifies the enzyme activity. We will see how they do that. So yes, Please be aware of this multi-step enzyme cataly catalyze pathway which you will be seeing in your subsequent slide. As I told you that there are some steps which are irreversible. Irreversible steps are bottleneck of the pathway because once you block this pathway the whole pathway slow down. Why is it so important? Because you don't want some pathways to become futile. For example, fatty acid synthesis versus fatty acid oxidation. They cannot happen simultaneously in your body. One needs to slow down over the other depending on the need of the body and we will integrate it later with these metabolic pathways. Right now we are just understanding how will you see these pathways as multi-step and enzyme catalyze pathway. Some steps will be irreversible, some steps will be reversible. Irreversible steps are regulated step. Irreversible steps are rate limiting and committed steps. We will know the difference soon. So yes, what is important to understand with these multi-step enzyme C ized pathway is the irreversibility the irreversible steps which are bottleneck of the pathway that control the whole pathway purposes that you don't want the two pathways as I gave you an examples to become futile they cannot happen simultaneously in your body then these irreversible steps are committed or rate limiting we will uh know the difference between them in the subsequent slide but also please know that the other step other than them which is committed and rate limiting steps can also be regulated and we will have examples of these two or those two in subsequently in our metabolic pathways as you know irreversible steps are bottleneck of the pathway subjected to regulation I enumerated two types of regulation long-term and short-term long-term regulation affects the enzyme quantity whereas shortterm regulation affects the enzyme uh or modifies the enzyme activity compartmentalization is also one of The mechanism of regulation apart from long-term and short-term regulation of these steps and please note that compartmentalization just means that some pathways are cytoolic mitochondrial and both we will learn examples subsequently and also in this lecture. So yes irreversible steps are very important as I enumerated you will see a lot of multi-step enzyme catalyze pathways some steps are irreversible they are regulated they are bottleneck of the path. way and how do they help? They do not they help that the pathways do not become futile. Their regulation is very essential for metabolism. Please know that there are one or more steps that could be irreversible. It's not just in a multi-step pathway. There is only one irreversible step. There could be one or more irreversible step. When we will do metabolic pathway, we will tell you which are the steps which are irreversible because as I told you they are subjected to regulation and their regulation is important for you to understand. So it's not just one step which is irreversible in the pathway. There could be one or more step which is irreversible in the pathway. But usually these irreversible steps are rate limiting or committed step. We will learn the difference between now rate limiting versus committed step. But also know that the other steps apart from these irreversible steps can also be regulated in your body. I told you though the mechanism of regulation is long-term short-term Compartmentalization is also one of the ways the metabolic pathways are regulated. But what is the what is the unique feature of a committed step? They are they are first of all they are catalyzed an irreversible step committed step of the pathway. Usually they are early in the linear pathway. They are target of regulation. As I told you any irreversible step uh is regulated. Similarly committed steps are also targeted for reg. ation and sometime committed step is the rate limiting step because essentially both committed and rate limiting steps are irreversible. Circular pathways do not have a committed step. Since we know the committed step now let's talk about the rate limiting step. So yes when you talk about committed step it's the early in a linear pathway not part of circular pathway subjected to regulation and sometimes committed step is also rate limiting step. There are some pathways which when we talk about them subsequently we will enumerate which are the committed step and which are the rate limiting step. Now when we talk about the rate limiting steps yes rate limiting step is the slowest in the pathway. Yes and since it's a irreversible step it is also regulated but it's subjected to very high regulation has high activation energy you will learn them when we will talk about gibs free energy overall free energy change. change in the form of delta G. They have a very high delta G and is negative and that is why they are irreversible step. The irreversible step which have high delta G and negative and that is why they are irreversible. And as I told you irreversible steps are committed or rate limiting. We just enumerated what is committed step. Now let's see what are rate limiting steps. But I told you earlier too there could be rate limiting step and committed step that doesn't means other steps are not regulated. This is an example of nucleotide metabolic pathway you will learn and yes the second step in this is the rate limiting step which is highly regulated slowest in the pathway and uh has high activation energy subjected to uh high regulation because it's the bottleneck of the pathway subjected to intense regulation and regulated step one important thing for you to understand Understand that rate limiting steps may be regulated but regulated steps may not be rate limiting because as I told you most of the irreversible steps are rate limiting or committed. We just uh enumerated the committed step. Now we are in enumerating what is a rate limiting step but other steps are also regulated. So you must understand this is also an example of a nucleotide metabolic pathway where the first step is regulated and And the second step is rate limiting. But the key thing for you to know that the rate limiting steps may be regulated but the regulated steps may not be rate limiting always but rate limiting steps are always regulated to subjected to intense regulation. So that is the difference between different steps. So we enumerated the difference between committed and the rate limiting steps. So yes you are where what are we doing is we are trying to enumerate that you will have a lot of multi-step enzyme catalyze pathway. Some steps of them would be irreversible. Irreversible steps may be rate limiting or committed. We enumerated the difference between rate limiting and committed steps. Don't forget that the other steps may be regulated. Rate limiting steps are regulated but regulated steps may not be rate limiting. Enzymes that sub catalyze the irreversible steps are subjected to regulation. We Know that the committed step is early linear in the pathway whereas rate limiting step is irreversible slowest with high activation energy and subjected to high intense regulation. Now we come to our last objective which is objective four. Since we have enumerated that you will come across a number of multi-step enzyme catalyze pathway where some steps will be irreversible. Irreversible steps can be rate limiting and committed. We enumerated the difference between rate limiting and committed steps too. Other steps can also be regulated in the body uh in these metabolic pathways. So now we are enumerating the mechanism of regulation of these metabolic pathways. In mechanism of regulation, please know that the enzyme activity can either be activated or inhibited. The mechanism of regulation is very important to control the pathways in your body. As I just gave you an example, usually the irreversible steps are the ones that are uh regulated. Irreversible steps, why they are uh regulated? Because they are bottleneck of the pathway. Once you block this step, the whole pathway can be slowed down. Why is it important? As I gave you example of fatty acid synthesis versus oxidation, you cannot have these two pathways working simultaneously in your body or activated simultaneous in your body. So, simultaneously in your body. So you need a mechanism of regulation s that such that one pathway is slowed when the other is active. There are different kinds of regulation which will learn in terms of long-term for versus short-term regulation. But here I'm just enumerating different types of regulation in generals in general what is product inhibition inhibition by the immediate product once the product is formed in sufficient quantity it just it just regulates the enzyme to slow down. Then there is a feedback inhibition by the final product. There is also a gene transcription which is long-term regulation where you induce or repress the expression of the gene and gene product of the enzyme. So let's see what are the different type of regulation which is enumerated in general in this uh illustration. So there's a long-term regulation as I told you because this regulation is occurring at the gene level which is induction and repression. Induction means in inducing the gene and enhancing the gene expression in this case the gene product or protein or the enzyme will increase. So that is why long-term regulation and uh alters the quantity of the enzyme with induction the quantity is increased. Repression means repressing repression of the gene gene product and the enzyme. So the concentration of the enzyme is reduced. Degradation of the protein is also of the way of regulation long-term regulation you know degradation in our body is only mainly by two pathways polyubucinated proteomal pathway or lizooal pathway long-term regulation definitely takes time which is days whereas short-term regulation takes minutes and hours what will we learn in short-term regulation effect of substrate concentration product inhibition I just told you how product inhibits product inhibition is mainly by the immed product feedback inhibition is by the final product. There are some enzymes which are which are formed as pro-enzyme and made active only at the site of action. So we will talk about those zyosins or pro-enzymes too. Coalent modification is reversible. This is phosphorilation versus defosphorilation coming up in the subsequent slide. And alosic regulation alsostic modifiers are used which are alosic activators or inhibittor s compartmentalization is a very important aspect of regulation. As I told you, some pathways are cytoolic, some are mitochondrial and some are both that helps them to be regulated. So let's see long-term regulation. Does it take long yes days and does it alter enzyme quantity rather than modifying enzyme activity? Yes, that is why you how do you achieve that? The long-term regulation is achieved by induction of gene expression and its product protein. So in which is induction and repression. Induction will increase the enzyme quantity. Repression will decrease the enzyme quantity. Takes days and hours mainly alters enzyme quantity rather than modifying its activity. Induction increases the quantity of the enzyme by enhancing gene expression and gene product which is protein which is enzyme. Repression decreases the enzyme concent. ation by repressing the gene expression or its product protein which is enzyme here insulin is mainly an anabolic hormone as I enumerated earlier too there are only two genesis insulin does not support which is gluconneioenesis and ketogenesis gluconioenesis is forming glucose from non-carbohydrate source and ketogenesis is forming ketone bodies inside your body so insulin is a major anabolic hormone promotes Genesis is except two genesis does not support gluconneioenesis and ketogenesis. But insulin is otherwise the major anabolic hormone in your body. Short-term regulation instead of altering the quantity actually modifies enzyme activity. It's reversible and rapid occurs in minutes and hours. Mechanism let's do what's the effect of substrate versus product. Pro-enzyme into enzyme reversible coalent modification which is phosphor defosphorilation of the key enzyme and alosic regulation. Here I want to bring your attention please know that all these mechanism of regulation are for those enzymes that catalyze the rate limiting step committed steps also as I told you though you know the difference between rate limiting step and committed step both that catalyze an irreversible reaction but there are other steps that can be regulated so that that is why these mechanism of regulation are for those and enzymes of those steps that are subjected to these mechanism of regulation. Let's see what is the effect of substrate concentration. Very important is I will give you an example of liver. Liver is a chief site of metabolism in your body. So you want for example liver wants to utilize glucose. You want glucose to flow inside the liver only after meal when glucose is high and is to be utilized. There are transporters that help glucose to push it inside the liver. But inside the liver there's a one key enzyme. You will always be uh talked about this enzyme which is glucoinise versus exocynise. So yes again liver is a chief site of metabolism. So uh because it's chief site of metabolism it will metabolize the macronutrients. Let's give example of glucose. Carbs are absorbed as glucose. Glucose will flow in liver only after meals and glucose transporters help them to flow in gluc ucose inside the liver. Once glucose is inside the liver, there's an enzyme known as glucoinise which phosphorilates glucose traps glucose in the form of glucose 6 phosphate so that it's irreversible exit for its irreversible exit and further utilization. So this is very key enzyme gluccoinise versus hexokinise. Kynise means those enzyme that add the phosphate. Both enzymes are very important and given as an example of regulation for Example, glucoinise is not active when you have low glucose in the blood because remember as I told you when glucose is low in the blood when will glucose not be high or I would say in your body when you wake up in the morning or in between meals. So yes or fasting in that case gluccoinise will not be active inside the liver because glucynise becomes active only with high in the presence of high glucose concentration in the liver after meal. Yes. Your glucose will be high in the blood because you have uh consumed your for that prerequisite is that you consume your macronutrients carbohydrates in your diet. You digest and absorb them and they come in the circulation. So after meal when glucose is high yes they will be taken up by the liver for utilization because that's the chief metabolism for your macronutrients and then glucoinise will turn on glucose metabolism and first key step in any glucose metab abolism is addition of phosphate who does that job kynise. That's why it's there are two enzymes in your body that phosphorilate glucose and purpose is that it's irreversible exit and activation. So gluccoinise and hexokinise which one is active in high glucose concentration glucoinise. Apart from that let's see product inhibition now. So this is the effect of substrate concent conc concentration. This is the substrate or the metabolic pathway. Now let's see what is the effect. of product inhibition in the same way. So substrate concentration is which enzyme is influenced by substrate concentration glucoinise not hexokinise. Now let's see product inhibition. Product inhibition is always by the immediate product. Product inhibition which is in the subsequent slide. Product inhibition is for hexokynes. What is product inhibition? Inhibition by the immediate product. What was feedback inhibition? Inhibition by the final products anywhere at the level of the enzyme. We did hexocinise and glucoinise. I just told you glucoinise as well as hexokinise are very important to phosphorilate gl glucose. Any kynise in your body add phosphates to the compound. Why you need to phosphorilate glucose for utilization so that it's irreversible exit? So it does not exit outside the cell and then subsequently goes down in the pathway. Just as glucynase is affected by the substrate glucose and is active only when blood glucose is high. Please know that which is after meal. Glucoinise is not active in fasting. Similarly, hexocinise is inhibited by its product which is glucose 6 phosphate. So hexocinise is inhibit is subjected to product inhibition whereas gluccoinise is subjected to substrate concentration. So also you must understand that all enzymes do not undergo same regulation. There are different regulation for different enzymes which are key for the pathway. For example, Glucoinise is affected by substrate concentration. Glucoinise is only active when blood glucose is high after meals. Glucoinise is not active in fasting when blood glucose is low in the lower than normal in the blood. Whereas hexokinise is subjected to product inhibition. Similarly, hexokinise is not affected by substrate concentration and glucoinise is not affected by product inhibition. So you should know key regulation of each enzyme and As it's enumerated, glucinise is not inhibited by its product glucose 6 phosphate. Whereas hexokinise is inhibited by its product glucose 6 phosphate. What is product inhibition? Inhibition by the immediate product. Inhibition of the enzyme by the immediate product. And what is product inhibition is just saying product is formed enough. It's giving signal to the enzyme to slow down. So hexokinise is subjected to product inhibition. Glucoin is subjected to substrate. concentration regulation which is glucose concentration in the blood. Now there are some pro-enzymes such as pancreatic enzymes which should not be active inside the cells which is pancreas. One example given here of this pancreatic pro-enzyme also known as zyosin isogen. They are only made active inside the lumen where they have their sight of action. Why? Because if these pro-enzymes are made active inside the cell they will they are prolytitic enzyme they will cause auto cell protolyis and lead to acute pancreatitis or pancreatitis. So there could be a inherited condition where they are active inside the cells and what could be the consequence pancreatitis. So this is also a part of regulation where enzymes for example pancreatic enzyme one of the example of pancreatic enzyme given here is stripsogen which is formed as pro-enzyme enzyosin. Please know that they cannot be made active inside the cell. They are made active though that process of converting pro-enzyme into enzyme is very rapid and uh it's essential for them to be active in the lumen to uh for proteolyis. If these enzymes if these pancreatic proteases are made active inside the cells if these pancreatic proteases are made active inside the cells they may cause pancreatic cell autoyis and lead to for example Triposinogen if it is made active inside the cells and converted into trison it may cause autoscalis and pancreatitis very important please know that we are not learning pure just biochemistry we are learning biochemistry applicable to clinical medicines so once you know pro-enzyme enzymes is one of the mechanism of regulation example is trinogen converted into trison you should also know clinical application what will happen if tripsogen is activated inside the cell It's not good. It will cause auto cell prolyis of the pancreatic cell leading to pancreatitis. So clinical application is important with every aspect of biochemistry. So I would always teach you biochemistry applicable to clinical medicine. What is coalent modification? It's reversible process. It is addition of phosphate as you can see here or removal of phosphate. Please know to add phosphate to enzyme or to add phosphate. Do you remember what is the enzyme? Yes, it's kynise. But here and which kynise works here glucoinise and hexokinise are not working here. The kynise is a protein kynise because enzymes are protein in nature. So what is coalent modification? Simp simple adding phosphate to the enzyme or removing phosphate to the enzyme. It is rapid and reversible. It is transient. That means you can add the phosphate with the help of kynise and you can remove the phosphate with the help of phosphatase. How does it happen and why it is important? You will learn subsequently with regulation of each enzyme because as I told you not all enzyme are subjected to same kind of regulation. For example, gluccoinise is affected by glucose concentration in the blood whereas hexokinise is not. Hexocchinise is affected by product inhibition regulation whereas glucynise is not. So similarly There are other enzymes which undergo reversible addition of phosphate phosphorilation with the help of kynise. Defosphorilation removal of phosphate with the help of phosphotase. So reversible phosphorilation and defosphorilation of the enzyme is known as coalent modification. Very simple. Please keep it simple. Reversible co addition of phosphate and removal of phosphate of the enzyme is one of the mechanism of regulation. which is known as coalent modification. Phosphorilation is done by kynise. Removal of phosphate from the enzyme is done by phosphotase. Now why is it important? I will give you an example of insulin. Also remember that those kynise that add the phosphate to the enzymes they add the phosphate to serene thriionine or tyrrosin residues of enzyme. Since enzymes are protein nature you should also know that you should understand that these reactions are specific. The enzyme kynise which is not a gluccoinise or exocinise here but protein kynise which is adding phosphate to the enzymes the regulated enzyme or the enzyme which is subjected to regulation. Where does the kynases add the phosphate to the enzyme to the serene thriionine and tyrrosine residues of enzyme but one key and similarly once you add the enzyme by the kynise it's reversible and you can remove the phosphate from the enzyme with the help of phosphotase. But one thing is very very important. Please know that these are under the regulation of hormone and insulin always and always defosphorilates the key enzyme. Please don't mess up there. Insulin never phosphorilates the key enzymes. The enzymes that are subjected to regulation. Insulin always and always defosphorilates the key enzyme whereas glucagon and epinephrine always and always phosphorilates the key enzyme. And now you will understand the purpose in the metabolic pathway. But from here you can understand insulin is the only anabolic hormone except insulin does not support gluconioenesis and ketogenesis. But the hormone that work antagonist to insulin are glucagon and epinephrine. And you can clearly see their opposite effect inside the cell. But insulin always and always defosphorilates the key enzyme. Please know that. Now whether this form form will be active or this form will be active. I will just give you an example of insulin. So in since insulin always and always defosphorilates the key enzyme any pathway which is supported by insulin will be active in defosphorilated form. Again because insulin always and always defosphorilates the key enzyme by reversible coalent modification. Any pathway which is supported by ens by insulin those enzymes of those path way will be active in defosphorilated form. Very very important for you to understand. So yes, it's insulin versus glucagon and epinephrine that indirectly controls coalent modification which is reversible and rapid in your body. So yes, is compartmentalization also an important component of regulation? Yes. I will give you an example. As I told you that compartmentalization means something pathways are cytoolic, some are mitochondrial and some are both. Since they are compartmentalized, they are regulated. For example, fatty acid synthesis versus fatty acid oxidation. Fatty acid synthesis is cytoolic. Fatty acid oxidation is mitochondrial. That is why and I told you this compartmentalization helps them that these cycles do not become futile and they can be easily regulated because of compartmentalization. Other um aspect I told you that these two cycles cannot go simultaneously in your body otherwise the purpose of fat metabolism will become futile. When synthesis is on oxidation slows down. Please know that none of the pathway in your body is shut down. One is active over the other. One is active and the other is slowed down. Also compartmentalization helps clinically in assessing the tissue damage. I will give you an example of ura cycle. URA cycle is operative in your liver. URA cycle uh ura is measured in the form of blood ura nitrogen in the blood. If blood ura nitrogen and since ura cycle is operating in the liver tell me if blood ura nitrogen levels are low in your body could it be a problem in the liver? Yes. Because major compartmentalization of ura cycle is in the liver. So if ura which is indicated by blood ura nitrogen level in the body is is low one problem that could be is there is a there is some kind of liver damage in your body. So yes compartmentalization also helps you know the clinical indicator or they are also helping you to know where is the tissue damage just as I exam I I told you an example a very common example used ura cycle in the liver. So ura synthesis in the liver and if bun levels which are the indirect indicator of ura in your body Blood ura nitrogen levels in the blood are low that means there's something wrong with the liver any kind of liver damage by alcohol toxins and that we will indicate or clinically relate later. So you know different types of regulation now and their timelines you know that long-term regulation which is induction and repression long-term regulation takes hours and days. Long-term regulation is by either induction repression or degradation ation because they are affecting expression at the level of gene. They take a longer time. Usually they alter long-term aulation which is the last box alters enzyme quantity which is induction increases enzyme quantity repression decreases enzyme quantity whereas short-term regulation are all of the above which is affecting uh enzyme regulation affected by substrate concentration. I gave you example of glukinise enzyme affected by product inhibition immediate product I gave you hexokinise. There is alostric regulation where the enzymes are affected by alostostric modifiers which are activators and inhibitor which will be taught with enzymes. There are some alostric molecules that alter the activity of the enzyme and these alostic modifiers in alostric regulation are alostric activators or inhibitor. Alostic activators activate the enzyme activity and alostic inhibitors inhibit the enzyme activity. I did talk talk about coalent modification which is reversible rapid it is a phosphorilation defosphilation of the key enzyme. So please know that sub effect of substrate concentration product inhibition alosic regulation reversible coalent modification pro-enzyme into enzyme or are shortterm regulation taking minutes. Yes this take minutes and hours but long-term regulation which alters the enzyme quantity effect at the level of gene takes hours and days. Whereas substrate concentration effect, product inhibition, elostosteric regulation and coalent modification, they modify enzyme activity rather than quantity. Which regulation alters the enzyme quantity induction, repression or long-term regulation? So that this has been enumerated in the mechanism of regulation. So now with this uh objective four, you know the mechanism of regulation, you No long-term takes days and hours. Short-term take minute and minutes and hours. Short-term is usually reversible and rapid. We enumerated various examples of short-term regulation, effect of substrate concentration, product inhibition, converting pro-enzyme into enzyme, alosic regulation, reversible coalent modification. We also enumerated that pro-enzyme into enzyme conversion if it happens within the cell. For example, pancreatic enzyme Tryogen then pancreatic cell autotolyis will take place that will lead to pancreatitis. Compartmentalization is also one of the means of regulation. They not only help regulating different pathways just such as fatty acid synthesis which is cytoolic versus fatty acid oxidation which is mitochondrial. Compartmentalization is also an indicator of tissue damage. For example, I gave you ura cycle in the liver. Low BU blood ura nitrogen which is reflection of ur levels in the blood indicate surely indicate there could be a liver damage by alcohol toxin or any kind of liver insult or injury. So now since you know the uh different type of regulation and this is asking about regulation that expression or changes the rate of expression at the level of gene gene product what do you think which type of regulation I'm talking first of all long-term short-term long-term because it's the long-term regulation that affects the gene expression and expression of its product or the protein which is by induction or repression and it takes days and hours as you have already known that long-term regulation is long with time and it's also um affecting the enzyme quantity rather than modifying enzyme activity. So that's all from me for today. We will uh definitely introduce and reintroduce these aspect of metabolic pathways in the subsequent lectures. You have office hours for more questions. Good luck.